=head1 NAME

Inline-Support - Support Information for Inline.pm and related modules.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This document contains all of the latest support information for
C<Inline.pm> and the recognized Inline Language Support Modules (ILSMs)
available on CPAN.

=head1 SUPPORTED LANGUAGES

The most important language that Inline supports is C<C>. That is
because Perl itself is written in C<C>. By giving a your Perl scripts
access to C<C>, you in effect give them access to the entire glorious
internals of Perl. (Caveat scriptor :-)

As of this writing, Inline also supports:

 - C++
 - Java
 - Python
 - Tcl
 - Assembly
 - CPR
 - And even Inline::Foo! :)

Projects that I would most like to see happen in the year 2001 are:

 - Fortran
 - Ruby
 - Lisp
 - Guile
 - Bash
 - Perl4

=head1 SUPPORTED PLATFORMS

C<Inline::C> should work anywhere that CPAN extension modules (those
that use XS) can be installed, using the typical install format of:

    perl Makefile.PL
    make
    make test
    make install

It has been tested on many Unix and Windows variants.

B<NOTE>: C<Inline::C> requires Perl 5.005 or higher because
C<Parse::RecDescent> requires it. (Something to do with the C<qr>
operator)

Inline has been successfully tested at one time or another on the
following platforms:

    Linux
    Solaris
    SunOS
    HPUX
    AIX
    FreeBSD
    OpenBSD
    BeOS
    OS X
    WinNT
    Win2K
    WinME
    Win98
    Cygwin

The Microsoft tests deserve a little more explanation. I used the following:

 Windows NT 4.0 (service pack 6)
 Perl 5.005_03 (ActiveState build 522)
 MS Visual C++ 6.0
 The "nmake" make utility (distributed w/ Visual C++)

C<Inline::C> pulls all of its base configuration (including which
C<make> utility to use) from C<Config.pm>. Since your MSWin32 version of
Perl probably came from ActiveState (as a binary distribution) the
C<Config.pm> will indicate that C<nmake> is the system's C<make>
utility. That is because ActiveState uses Visual C++ to compile Perl.

To install C<Inline.pm> (or any other CPAN module) on MSWin32 w/ Visual
C++, use these:

    perl Makefile.PL
    nmake
    nmake test
    nmake install

Inline has also been made to work with Mingw32/gcc on all Windows
platforms. This is a free compiler for Windows. You must also use a perl
built with that compiler.

The "Cygwin" test was done on a Windows 98 machine using the Cygwin
Unix/Win32 porting layer software from Cygnus. The C<perl> binary on
this machine was also compiled using the Cygwin tool set (C<gcc>). This
software is freely available from http://sources.redhat.com/cygwin/

If you get Inline to work on a new platform, please send me email email.
If it doesn't work, let me know as well and I'll see what can be done.

=head1 SEE ALSO

For general information about Inline see L<Inline>.

For information about using Inline with C see L<Inline::C>.

For sample programs using Inline with C see L<Inline::C-Cookbook>.

For information on writing your own Inline Language Support Module, see
L<Inline-API>.

Inline's mailing list is inline@perl.org

To subscribe, send email to inline-subscribe@perl.org

=head1 AUTHOR

Brian Ingerson <INGY@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c) 2000, 2001, 2002. Brian Ingerson. All rights reserved.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the same terms as Perl itself.

See http://www.perl.com/perl/misc/Artistic.html

=cut
